# Probability and Counting

> quantifying certainty

## definitions

sample space: the set of all possible outcomes of an experiment
events: a subset of the sample space (proability and set theory that allows
        stats to be treated as a mathematical subject)

naive definition of probability: $P(A)=\frac{\text{\# of favorable outcomes}}{\text{\# of possible outcomes}}$ assuming that all the outcomes are equally likely and having
finite sample space.

e.g. flip coin twice and getting HH; sample space HH, HT, TH, TT. thus $\frac{1}{4}$
assumming fair coin (equally likely to get H and T)

the naive definition will not hold quickly when asked the two questions below,

1. whats the possibility of neptune having life?
2. whats the possibility of neptune having intelligent life?

if $1$ is $0.5$, then $2$ should not be also $0.5$. it should be strictly $\lt{0.5}$
there should be a strict inequality here.

### basic principles of counting

counting is needed to get $\text{\# of * outcomes}$ from the naive definition
of $P(A)$.

multiplication rule: if have experiment with $n_1$ possible outcomes and for
each outcome of the 1st experiment, there are $n_2$ outcomes for the 2nd
experiment, ..., for each $n_r$ outcomes for the rth experiment then overall,
there are $n_1\cdot{n_2}\cdot{...}\cdot{n_r}$ overall possible outcomes.

example: prob. of full house in poker in a 5 card hand from a completely
shuffled deck.

binomial coefficient "n choose k", $\binom{n}{k}=\frac{n!}{(n-k)!k!}$, 0 if $k\gt{n}$
no of subset of size k, of group of n people. order does not matter.

$$
\frac{13\cdot{\binom{4}{3}}\cdot{12}\cdot{\binom{4}{2}}}{\binom{52}{5}}
$$

## sampling table

sampling: choosing k objects out of n

| | order matters | order does not matters |
|-|---------------|------------------------|
| replacement | $n^k$ | $\binom{n+k-1}{k}$ |
| no replacement | $\frac{n!}{(n-k)!}$ | $\binom{n}{k}$ |

order does not matter and with replacement is not as easy to be obtained, but
it is useful.


## strategic practice

probability of rolling 4 fair dice is 21; probability of rolling 4 fair dice is 22

$P(A_21)=\frac{}{4*6C1}$